hello_world_3d

 
Hello World! (3D Printing)


You already calibrated your FABtotum and you are ready to print your first test object.
 If you haven't: go to Maintenance → First Setup for a comprehensive calibration wizard.

 To start printing you usually need filament. The FABtotum comes with some sample filament, but you may want to load more filament.
 If you have already some filament inside the head, hit the Maintenance  → Spool → Unload Spool procedure first. 
 Learn more about the Spool procedures .
 First you'll need a file to print. We already uploaded for you some printing samples in your printer, you can find it in Object Manager - Samples.
 You can also upload and print other files, following this procedure, but if you are new to the FABtotum just stick to the sample.
 Under the File Manager, Select the object you want to print, then press the “Print” button. 

(You can print something from the Create menu as well!) 

 

Now you are in the folder with the samples, choose your favourite file, for example Marvin key-chain, then Next  

 


 Be sure the working plane and the nozzle are clean, close the front cover, then press Continue as instructed. 

 

Choose Simple homing or Auto bed leveling  
 If your printer is well calibrated, select Simple homing: the print will start quickly.
 If you aren't sure about calibration, select Auto bed leveling: the probe will start to measure the bed orientation, then the print will start (it will require few seconds to heat-up). 

 

Wait for the printer to be ready: the carriage will be in the left corner, the Z axis will be homed and bed and nozzle heated (this usually requires around 2 minutes).
 Check the printer as soon as it starts printing (you can hear beep) to make sure the bed calibration is ok and that the nozzle is leaving a good amount of material on the plane so that the first layer (including the skirt/brim) is solid. 

Don't let any leftover filament get dragged in the print area, cut it if necessary.
 When your FABtotum is printing, you can check all the printing parameters in the Live feed section (nozzle temperature, bed temperature, Z height, etc.) 

 

While printing you can edit all those parameters in the Controls section. 

 

Wait for the printer to finish. You can track the progress from the FABUI. 

printing.jpg 

Once the print is completed, the bed will slide and cool down.
 Wait for the bed to reach a safe temperature. The bed LEDs will turn off when the temperature is below 50°C.
print_finished.jpg 

Congratulations! You just finished your first print! 

Proceed to remove the print by gently pulling it out or twisting the part from the cold glass surface. 

If you had problems during printing or your 3D printed object doesn't satisfy your expectations, check the trouble-shooting page here. 
  
hello_world_3d.txt · Last modified: 2016/05/09 16:32 by fabtotum