photogrammetry

  

Table of Contents


•Photogrammetry scanning

◦Uses


◦Procedure


◦Post processing

◾STEP 1: UPLOADING FILES


◾STEP 2: POST-PROCESSING


◾STEP 3: EXPORTING THE MESH



 
Photogrammetry scanning


This scanning method uses the camera on your FABotum for take photos that will be processed by an external photogrammetry service, such as Autodesk's 123Dcatch or Memento. 

Due to the big volume of data and the complex calculations, the post processing will be provided by your pc. 

Uses


This method work better with objects with a complex texture, not symmetricals, not shiny or transparent (like all kind of 3D scanners on the market). 

Procedure


Make a photogrammetry scan with Fabtotum is very easy, following this procedure: 

1. Connect your Fabtotum using Wifi or Ehternet cable.


2. On the fabui dashboard select “Scan” by clicking on the scanning icon (both are valid) 



3. On the scanning page choose “Create new object” (1), select “Photogrammetry” method (2), then click “Next” (3).


4. Set the scanning parameters: 
 ISO: 200 (If you have to scan darker objects, increase the value.), Size: 1920×1080 , Number of slices. 
 Download the Fabtotum Desktop server clicking “Here” (1) (The program is stored into the SD card, it's working with Windows XP or newer, OS X and linux). Test the connection by clicking on the “Check connection” (2), if the connection is working the button will turn in green color, then click on “Next” (3). 



5. Set and connect the Fabtotum Desktop server. 
 Choose the folder where you want to download the photos, by using “Choose folder” (1), “Start server” (2): 



6. Remove the printing bed, when ready click “Click Here when ready”. 
 
remove_bed_2.jpg


7. Attach the Chuck using three screws 
chuck_1.jpg


8. Using screws, duct tape or wires attch the object you want to scan and close the FABtotum's door. 
 When ready click “Click here when ready”. 
 
attaching.jpg


9. The scanning is started! Wait until the FABtotum took the last picture and sent it to your computer using the FABtotum Desktop Server 
 
attached.jpg


Post processing


Here you are the 123D catch post processing technique. The software is working only in Windows, it will require from 15 mins to 1 hour depending on your speed connection and to your computer specifications. 

STEP 1: UPLOADING FILES


Upload the pictures from your computer choosing the folder where you downloaded from the scanning process. 

Wait until all the pictures will be uploaded and the server will create the first version of the 3D model. 

 

 

 

STEP 2: POST-PROCESSING


If there are some parts you want to cut (you can see the black part on the yoda's chin), use the selection tool and draw a circle around the part you want to cut. When the loop will be closed, it will become red, now simply pressing the “backspace” button of your keybord, you will delete the selected part. 

 

 

 

STEP 3: EXPORTING THE MESH


Choose the quality of the mesh, considering as detailed is the quality, as longer will be the process. 

 

Memento 
  
photogrammetry.txt · Last modified: 2015/10/14 09:53 by jj